v23.1.5 release notes (#17376)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/_includes/releases/v23.1/v23.1.5.md

## v23.1.5

Release Date: July 5, 2023

{% include releases/release-downloads-docker-image.md release=include.release %}

<h3 id="v23-1-5-security-updates">Security updates</h3>

> - The full set of TLS ciphers that was present in v22.1 have ben included in the old cipher suites list, which can be enabled with the `COCKROACH_TLS_ENABLE_OLD_CIPHER_SUITES` environment variable. [#105370][#105370]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The full set of TLS ciphers that was present in v22.1 have been included in the existing cipher suites list, which can be enabled with the `COCKROACH_TLS_ENABLE_OLD_CIPHER_SUITES` environment variable. [#105370][#105370]
```

Typo here, and do you think "existing" would work? I see that "old" is in the env var name, so maybe can keep as "old".

<h3 id="v23-1-5-{{-site.data.products.enterprise-}}-edition-changes">{{ site.data.products.enterprise }} edition changes</h3>

- Added new [cluster settings](../v23.1/cluster-settings.html) in the `server.oidc_authentication.generate_cluster_sso_token` namespace that support using OIDC to generate a [JWT auth token for cluster SSO](../v23.1/sso-sql.html). [#105643][#105643]

<h3 id="v23-1-5-sql-language-changes">SQL language changes</h3>

- Improved the inline documentation and error messages related to [`SHOW RANGES`](../v23.1/show-ranges.html). [#105278][#105278]

> - Allow inbound foreign keys on TTL tables. [#105341][#105341]

Reviewer: The present tense on this one feels a little off among the other notes.

```suggestion
- Allowed inbound foreign keys on TTL tables. [#105341][#105341]
```

Or, could do something like "Inbound foreign keys on TTL tables are now allowed." 
If I have the meaning correct!

Author: Edited

> - Added columns `default_value` and `origin` (default, override, external-override) to the [`SHOW CLUSTER SETTING`](../v23.1/show-cluster-setting.html) command. [#105452][#105452]

Reviewer: The terms in parenthesis, I wasn't quite sure what they meant. It looks like they are the values to `origin` https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/105452/files#:~:text=return%20%5B...%5Dstring%7B%22default%22%2C%20%22override%22%2C%20%22external%2Doverride%22%7D%5Bv%5D

Perhaps something like the following:
```suggestion
- Added the columns `default_value` and `origin` ( with the values `default`, `override`, `external-override`) to the [`SHOW CLUSTER SETTING`](../v23.1/show-cluster-setting.html) command. [#105452][#105452]
```

- Added the `VIEWACTIVITY` and `VIEWACTIVITYREDACTED` [system privileges](../v23.1/security-reference/authorization.html#supported-privileges) for the `crdb_internal.cluster_queries` and `crdb_internal.node_queries` [tables](../v23.1/crdb-internal.html). [#105467][#105467]
- Fixed the error message to be more understandable when attempting to create [UDFs](../v23.1/user-defined-functions.html) under a virtual or temporary schema. [#105627][#105627]

<h3 id="v23-1-5-command-line-changes">Command-line changes</h3>

- Running [`cockroch node decommission <nodeID>`](../v23.1/cockroach-node.html#node-decommission) for a node that has already been decommissioned will now exit with code 0, as had been the case in CockroachDB versions prior to v23.1.0. [#103933][#103933]

<h3 id="v23-1-5-db-console-changes">DB Console changes</h3>

> - The [**Range Report** page](../v23.1/ui-hot-ranges-page.html#range-report) (route `/reports/range/:rangeID`) shows the **Hot Ranges** menu item as highlighted in the left side menu. The back button in the Range Report page redirects back to the Hot Ranges page. [#104980][#104980]

Reviewer: Total nit:

```suggestion
- The [**Range Report** page](../v23.1/ui-hot-ranges-page.html#range-report) (route `/reports/range/:rangeID`) shows the **Hot Ranges** menu item as highlighted in the left-side menu. The back button in the Range Report page redirects back to the Hot Ranges page. [#104980][#104980]
```

Reviewer: Also, I'm not 100% sure on whether the page names should be bold or not?

Reviewer: Same for the "views" in the note below, should they be bold? Or, is that just GUI elements?

- Added description to the tooltip for the `Idle` status only for the Active Transactions view. Excluded `Idle` status filter option for the Active Statements view. [#105062][#105062]

<h3 id="v23-1-5-bug-fixes">Bug fixes</h3>

- Added more precision to small percentage values on the percentage bars on the DB Console. [#105078][#105078]
- Fixed a crash when using `DurationToNumber` with empty duration object on SQL Activity tables. [#105152][#105152]
- `SpanStats` is no longer subject to stale information, and should be considered authoritative. [#105000][#105000]
- Fixed a bug in MuxRangefeed implementation that may cause MuxRangefeed to become stuck if enough ranges encountered certain error concurrently. [#105186][#105186]

> - [`SHOW CHANGEFEED JOBS`](../v23.1/show-jobs.html) no longer fails on v22.2 / v23.1 mixed version clusters. [#105008][#105008]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`SHOW CHANGEFEED JOBS`](../v23.1/show-jobs.html) no longer fails on v22.2 and v23.1 mixed-version clusters. [#105008][#105008]
```

> - [`GRANT SYSTEM ALL ...`](../v23.1/grant.html) no longer causes the grantee to be unable to login. This was due to a bug where `ALL` would include the `NOSQLLOGIN` system privilege. Since `NOSQLLOGIN` is the only "negative" privilege, it is now excluded from the `ALL` shorthand, and must be granted explicitly in order to restrict logins. [#105080][#105080]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`GRANT SYSTEM ALL ...`](../v23.1/grant.html) no longer causes the grantee to be unable to log in. This was due to a bug where `ALL` would include the `NOSQLLOGIN` [system privilege](../v23.1/security-reference/authorization.html#supported-privileges). Since `NOSQLLOGIN` is the only "negative" privilege, it is now excluded from the `ALL` shorthand, and must be granted explicitly in order to restrict logins. [#105080][#105080]
```

- CockroachDB previously could encounter `zero transaction timestamp in EvalContext` when evaluating the [`COPY FROM`](../v23.1/copy-from.html) command. The bug was introduced in v23.1.0 and is now fixed. [#105295][#105295]

> - Fixed the data fetching for the Database and Table Details pages. Prior to this change, some databases/tables could be permanently stuck in a loading state, causing their corresponding page to permanently show a Spinner. This change fixes the data fetching for these pages to ensure all databases/tables are loaded correctly. [#105315][#105315]

Reviewer: Small nits, not sure if the page names should be bold or not?

```suggestion
- Fixed the data fetching for the Database and Table Details pages. Prior to this change, some databases/tables could be permanently stuck in a loading state, causing their corresponding page to permanently show a spinner. This change fixes the data fetching for these pages to ensure all databases and tables are loaded correctly. [#105315][#105315]
```

- Fixed a bug where [`INSERT .. ON CONFLICT .. DO UPDATE`](../v23.1/insert.html) queries incorrectly resulted in an "ambiguous column" error. The bug only presented if the target table had a computed column with an expression referencing a column with a `DEFAULT` value. [#105025][#105025]
- On the SQL Statistics pages, a transaction query is now available as long as the statement fingerprints associated with the transaction also exist in the payload. [#105318][#105318]
- Previously, CockroachDB would crash when evaluating [`CREATE TABLE .. AS or CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW .. AS`](../v23.1/create-table.html) statements when the `AS` clause selected data from `crdb_internal.cluster_statement_statistics` or `crdb_internal.cluster_transaction_statistics` virtual tables. The bug has been present since at least v22.1 and is now fixed. [#105325][#105325]
- Fixed a source of mutex contention within the storage engine that could increase tail latencies on high-CPU, high-throughput deployments. [#105361][#105361]

> - Fixed a bug where nodes could terminate with the following message: `server startup failed: cockroach server exited with error: ‹migration-job-find-already-completed›: key range id:X is unavailable: ‹failed to send RPC: no replica node information available via gossip for rX›` [#104246][#104246]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where nodes could terminate with the following message: `server startup failed: cockroach server exited with error: ‹migration-job-find-already-completed›: key range id:X is unavailable: ‹failed to send RPC: no replica node information available via gossip for rX›`. [#104246][#104246]
```

> - Previously, cross-database type references could sneak in through `CREATE TABLE...AS` statements if the source table was from another database and any of its columns was of a user-defined type. This introduced a bug where the source table could be dropped and the type could not be found for the CTAS table. This commit disallows such CTAS as a fix. [#105621][#105621]

Reviewer: I wonder if the "sneak in" language would maybe not translate well. Looking at the original issue, _I think_, that "allow/disallow" is what we're talking about here. Also, let me know what you think, but I was not super familiar with CTAS as an acronym, should we update to `CREATE TABLE ... AS SELECT`? Not sure, perhaps this is more common in our docs than I think!
```suggestion
- Previously, cross-database type references were allowed through `CREATE TABLE...AS` statements if the source table was from another database and any of its columns was of a user-defined type. This introduced a bug where the source table could be dropped and the type could not be found for the CTAS table. This commit disallows such CTAS as a fix. [#105621][#105621]
```

- CockroachDB can now automatically delete statistics for dropped tables from `system.table_statistics` table. However, out of caution, this mechanism is disabled by default on v23.1 releases. [#105479][#105479]

> - Fixed a race  condition that can occur when multiple SQLServers are created simultaneously, causing simultaneous writes to an unprotected global variable used to configure a CCL audit logging feature. [#105725][#105725]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a race condition that can occur when multiple SQL servers are created simultaneously, causing simultaneous writes to an unprotected global variable used to configure a CCL audit logging feature. [#105725][#105725]
```

> - Previously, referencing a user-defined type in the body of a user-defined function would result in an error at the time of creating the function. This is now fixed. [#105617][#105617]

Reviewer: Perhaps link to ENUMs and/or user-defined functions here?

Author: Done.

> - CockroachDB now returns an error during UDF creation if an input argument has type `RECORD`. [#105735][#105735]

Reviewer: Maybe link to user-defined function page?

Author: Done
